---
title: "Validating uncertainty propagation approaches for two stage Bayesian spatial models using simulation-based calibration"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2025-10-31-talk-1
venue: "Wolfson Lecture Theatre"
date: 2025-10-3
location: "University of Bath, UK"
---
[More information here](https://people.bath.ac.uk/cr777/seminar.html)

My talk tackles the problem of uncertainty propagation in two-stage Bayesian models, with a focus on spatial applications. A two-stage modelling framework has the advantage of being more computationally efficient than a fully Bayesian approach when the first-stage model is already complex in itself, and avoids the potential problem of unwanted feedback effects. Two ways of doing two-stage modelling are the crude plug-in method and the posterior sampling method. The former ignores the uncertainty in the first-stage model, while the latter can be computationally expensive. In this talk, I will show results from a model validation exercise of the two aforementioned approaches. I will also discuss a new approach to do uncertainty propagation, which we call the Q uncertainty method, implemented using the Integrated Nested Laplace Approximation (INLA). The different approaches are validated using the simulation-based calibration method, which tests the selfconsistency property of Bayesian models. Results show that the crude plugin method underestimates the true posterior uncertainty in the second-stage model parameters, while the resampling approach and the proposed method are correct. I will illustrate the approaches in a real-life data application which aims to link relative humidity and dengue cases in the Philippines for August 2018.

